one of Israel's responses to the October
7th attacks was to promis to permanently
destroy Hamas nearly two months after
the attacks the group that has ruled
Gaza for the last 16 years still seems
to control large parts of the enclave
and some are questioning whether
Israel's goal is even achievable and if
Hamas were to be toppled the question
remains who would fill the power vacuum
joining us to discuss this is Dian buhu
she's a ramala based lawyer and former
spokesperson with the Palestine
Liberation Organization and KH alindi
senior fellow at the Middle East
Institute in Washington DC I want to
thank you both for joining me today Dan
I'm going to start with you uh since
October 7th Israel has consistently
reiterated a vow to destroy Hamas it's
estimated that Hamas has 30,000 Fighters
at least uh and by the Israeli Army's
own records in its own account the air
strikes and the attacks have killed
somewhere around 1 to 2,000 Hamas
Fighters uh given the level of
Destruction that we see so far given the
current situation on the ground uh is a
military victory for Israel even
possible no but that's not what they
wanted from the beginning Mark U their
idea of destroy Hamas is code for
destroy Gaza and anybody who's been
watching this knows that this is what
exactly what Israel means and that's why
you see that the vast majority 62% of
those who've been killed are Palestinian
children under the age of 18 and women
and so all along their attempt has never
been to destroy Hamas because they know
that that's not achievable Hamas is not
just a milit it's not just a political
party it's it's an ideology as well but
instead it was code for destroy Gaza and
that's exactly what it is that they're
doing that's an important Point KH uh
and that's something that uh the very
famous renowned even Palestinian
historian Rashid KH said he said and I
quote Hamas will remain as a political
force whether the Israelis occupy Gaza
or leave destroying Hamas as a political
institution destroying Hamas as an idea
is impossible right why well the the
idea of Hamas of course Hamas is the
Islamic resistance movement so they have
an islamist ideology but their primary
focus is resistance resisting uh
occupation uh
repression um by by Israel and so you'd
expect that when you have a system of
structural violence like an occupation
which can only be maintained through uh
through violence uh you're going to get
violent forms of resistance uh and
that's that's an inevitability if it
wasn't called Hamas it would be called
something else um and it would behave
more or less the same way because those
are the conditions uh that Palestinians
live under that's an important Point
Deanna and and I get that at the
philosophical level but there's also a
political question very practical
political question that we also have to
ask which is uh is there another party
right now that could step in to govern
even if Hamas uh were to be defeated and
I asked that question more to get a
sense of what's going on on on the
ground and what the what the kind of
political climate is so I'm trying to
get a sense of sort of what the
possibilities are well that's a great
question Mark the the the problem is is
that there is no political party that's
going to come in on the back of an
Israeli tank in other words they're not
going to come in and take over and rule
or do anything in Gaza based on what the
destruction that Israel has heaped on on
the Gaza Strip um and so instead the
question that we should be asking
ourselves is what comes afterwards that
Palestinians end up deciding not whether
it is the United States deciding or
Israel deciding but what is it that
Palestinians want will it be Hamas maybe
maybe they want out it's not entirely
clear but whatever it is whichever group
it is however groups might be more than
one group it has to be pal palan L and
not American driven or Israeli driven or
even internationally driven it has to be
Palestinians who finally get the ability
to choose how it is that they want to
live in the end and not based on Israeli
dictates uh given what you've seen and
what you're hearing uh has Hamas seen a
loss of support on the ground uh given
the destruction that we've seen at the
hands of the Israeli government given
the fact that some argue that you know
some of it was foreseeable uh has Hamas
lost support
no quite the opposite Palestinians know
who's dropping the bombs and we know
that it is Israel who's dropping the
bombs and it's not Hamas who is dropping
the bombs and if anything people are
saying that that they're supportive of
the resistance that it's the resistance
that's the only thing coming in the way
between between Israel and the complete
destruction of the Palestinian people
our complete Annihilation why do they
say that because on October 6th as
you'll recall the day before um there
was nobody ever talking about about
liberating Palestine in fact the
Diplomatic Community had dropped the
issue so much so that that everything
that Israel was doing was was barely met
with something called grave concern on
the part of the International Community
if the choice was to die a very slow
death where nobody is watching which is
what the Israelis wanted to do or to
push back and to have at least the world
recognize the brutality of the Israeli
regime
it yeah I mean I think uh uh you know I
actually have a slightly different uh
take I I think Israel is trying to
destroy Hamas I think they think that
they can destroy Hamas um and it comes
from a uh this this notion like all
Colonial Powers um they don't fully
appreciate the Grievances they don't
recognize the Grievances of the people
that they occupy or rule over and so
they see Palestinian Politics as sort of
an artificial construction um and and
these groups
uh can be excised uh in the same way
that they were that they think that they
were created so they can be surgically
removed um from from they're being so
nonsurgical in their in their
destruction would you would you say that
then the Palestinian people the children
who are dying the hospitals that are
being blown up are just sort of
collateral damage that they're willing
to accept or is it a Bo and situation
where they want to destroy Hamas and
they want to destroy the Gaza Strip I I
I think it's both I think they want to
destroy Hamas
and the Gaza Strip I think they are
operating um on the basis of rage and
revenge uh still now more than eight
weeks in um that has been the the the
primary motivator so much so that
they've given uh barely any thought at
all to what comes next and uh we know
what happens when you have a security
vacuum and a governance vacuum uh you
get you get violent groups uh fill that
void you get uh extremists uh you get
more radicalization so it's not only
inhumane the way Israel is conducting
itself it's actually quite stupid um if
they care at all about their own
security because it it absolutely will
come back to haunt them help me think
about what the future looks like for
Palestinians in Gaza the Associated
Press reporting that Israel's offensive
has turned the area into a quote
uninhabitable moonscape uh the UN
estimates that
1.7 this is a stunning number to 1.7
million Palestinians in Gaza are newly
homeless even if a permanent ceasefire
were to be put in place today at this
very moment uh to borrow the words of
one gin Professor people have nothing to
return to um and that's not even
mentioning the psychological impact that
a Siege uh has had and a Complete Siege
is having right now on the on the people
of Gaza uh what will it take to
rebuild um it will take
more time and money and effort than
anything we've ever seen in the context
of the occupied Palestinian territory
Israel's actions are moving in a certain
direction they are moving toward the
permanent displacement of that 1.6
million
Palestinians it's it's it's impossible
for them to remain in the south of Gaza
forever right it's just too crowded and
and there are no Services um and so
think very much uh the the ultimate goal
is to push them out of Gaza and that's
where the real danger is Dan what do you
say what does it take to rebuild Gaza
and also who's responsible for doing it
who should be paying is Israel um who's
going to end up probably paying will end
up being likely the Europeans uh but who
should be actually physically doing it
is Palestinians want to rebuild our own
places and spaces but what will Gaza
look like afterwards that this is the
the question that keeps many of us up at
night because we haven't seen the end of
this I remember a few weeks ago on your
show I think it was seven weeks ago on
your show you had Danny iyon on the show
who who very clearly stated that
Palestinians should be moved into the
Egyptian Sinai pen peninsula in other
words what they are looking for is
ethnic cleansing they want to get rid of
Palestinians but I I do want to address
something about the destruction of Hamas
I think that Israel knows very well that
it can't destroy Hamas there not looking
for security they're not looking for it
at all if they were the formula is there
but instead they looking constantly to
perpetuate this so that it creates this
mindset inside Israel that they're that
they're not safe and it creates the
mindset in the outer world that they're
not safe as well and therefore more
money flows more security more weapons
and so on I think Israel knows full well
what it's what it's doing and it knows
full well that it cannot destroy Hamas
that this is simply code for destroying
Gaza destroying Palestinians and forcing
Israelis to Forever live under under the
gun that'll have to be our last word dan
bu thank you so much for joining us khy
thank you so much for joining us as well
everybody that is our show UPF front
we'll be back next
week